A wintry storm brought blizzard-like conditions to parts of the Midwest early Monday, grounding hundreds of flights and causing some road traffic chaos as commuters returned to work after the Thanksgiving weekend.
The Chicago area was slammed with up to 30 centimetres of wet snow, and whiteout conditions stalled commuter traffic on the roads. The National Weather Service said 19 centimetres of snow fell at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport and 12.5 centimetres fell at Midway International Airport.
As of 10:15 a.m., 809 flights were cancelled at O'Hare in the past 24 hours, with delays averaging about an hour, according to the Chicago Department of Aviation. Midway International Airport was reporting 69 cancellations, with delays averaging less than 15 minutes.
The flight-tracking website FlightAware had reported earlier that 875 flights headed to or from the U.S. were cancelled.
One Chicago native trying to fly to Orlando, Fla., chided himself for not heeding the weather forecast, but maintained his sense of humour.
"I knew it was right around the corner, and behold I stayed that one extra day and paid the price. So I was able to spend the evening here at beautiful O'Hare and had plenty of company," said Mark McCoy, referring to all the other travellers stranded at the travel hub.
"It's all part of the Thanksgiving travel experience when you're flying somewhere," McCoy said.Parts of southeastern Wisconsin, just north of Chicago, suffered a glancing blow from the storm, with about 23 centimetres of blowing and drifting snow.
The storm also dumped wet snow on parts of Michigan's Lower Peninsula, creating treacherous driving conditions. Police responded to dozens of crashes Monday morning in the Lansing area. Authorities warned that roads were icy and covered with snow and encouraged people to stay off the roads unless travel was essential.
The National Weather Service said that seven to 20 cm fell across northern Missouri on Sunday. The Missouri State Highway Patrol reported multiple fender-benders but by midmorning on Monday the Department of Transportation said all roads were opened. Flights were mostly on time Monday at Kansas City International Airport, one day after the storm caused widespread delays.
Roads in much of Nebraska and the southern half of Iowa remained covered in snow and ice early Monday after the storm had passed those states. Several state and U.S. highways were impassable in Nebraska, but traffic was moving on Interstate 29 in the southwestern corner of Iowa and Interstate 80 in the eastern part of the state, despite a blanket of snow.
Roads were slick in northern Indiana early Monday after about five centimetres of snow fell, and more was forecast through the afternoon.
On Sunday, Kansas Gov. Jeff Colyer declared a state of emergency in the state after five to 36 centimetres of snow fell in some areas. The state Department of Transportation reported several road closures Monday, mostly in the extreme northeast, but said a stretch of Interstate 70 that had been closed on Sunday was reopened.